# Feature levers

Feature levers allow or limit access to certain features of your product according to a customer's subscription plan. In Planship, this is accomplished by the combination of _levers_ that define features and default values and [_entitlements_](/concepts/plans/#entitlements) that specify specific limits or allowances for these levers on individal plans.

!!! Example
    Imagine a product that does parallel processing of customer data, where different pricing tiers offer different levels of processing concurrency. To accomplish this with Planship, you would define an *execution-concurrency* lever and then create entitlements that specify desired *execution-concurrency* values on different plans (E.g. `1`, `10`, and `100` on "Free," "Personal," and "Business" plans respectively).

## Creating a lever

Creating a feature lever is straightfoward - choose a unique *name*, select its *type*, and specify a *default value* along with any additional configuration specific to the feature *type*.

### Name and slug

When lever related data (E.g. entitlements or usage) is retrieved via the Planship API, the lever is identified by its slug. Lever slugs are unique within a product, and just like all other slugs in Planship, they are autogenerated from their names.

### Default value

The default value of a lever is the value used for implicit entitlements across all plans.

### Types

Planship comes with a number of built-in feature types to support feature levers commonly used in SaaS pricing.

#### Feature flag

Feature flags are simple on/off boolean features where a given feature is either available on a given plan or not.

!!! Tip
    A feature flag lever can be implicily turned on or off across all plans by setting the lever's default value to `true` or `false`.

#### Integer

Integer levers represent numerical features and are useful for defining limits on **unmetered** product resources ([For handling **metered** product resources, see _metered levers_](/concepts/metered-levers)). In addition to the *default value*, the following configuration options are available:

- *min* - minimum allowed entitlement value (default: 0)
- *max* - maxium allowed entitlement value (default: 100)
- *step* - entitlement value step increment (default: 0)
- *infinite* - value that represents an inifinite entitlement value (default: -1)

#### List

List levers provide a list of values and are useful for features that map to one or more sub-features (E.g. A list of 3rd-party integrations a plan is entitled to).
